Aerodynamics

Teacher Guide

CP0704
www.matrixtsl.co
m

Copyright 2023-2024 Matrix Technology Solutions Limited

About this course
Aims and introduction
The ‘Wind Tunnel 125’ module aims to introduce students to concepts involved in aerodynamics
and fluid flow.
A series of practical investigations illustrates a range of topics relating to fluid dynamics, using
equipment which can be used with minimal supervision. This equipment opens up a wide range of
student-designed investigations exploring factors involved in the design of wind-generator blades,
aeroplane wings or vehicles.
Prior Knowledge
It is expected that students have a sufficient science / engineering background to enable them to
design investigations, take, record and analyse measurements and manage observational errors .
Some mathematical capability is desirable, including the ability to use spreadsheets to analyse observations.
Using this course:
An Equipment Guide is available which describes features of the equipment and how they can be
used.

The Wind Tunnel 125 kit includes automated data capture software. The advantage to students of
using this is that it will speed progress through the module. However, the instructor may feel that
they lose close connection to the details of the investigations. However, it is a powerful tool for the
instructor to demonstrate aspects of the work in plenary sessions.
It is expected that the Worksheets and Student Handout are printed / photocopied, preferably in
colour, for the students’ use.
The worksheets have:
• an introduction to the topic under investigation;
• step-by-step instructions for the investigation that follows
• a guide to analysing the results.

This format encourages self-study, with students working at a rate that suits their ability.
The Student Handout is a record of the measurements taken in each worksheet and questions
relating to them. Students do not need a permanent copy of the worksheets but could require their
own copy of the Student Handout
It is for the instructor to monitor that their understanding is keeping pace with progress through the
worksheets. One way to do this is to ‘sign off’ each worksheet, as the student completes it, and in
the process have a brief chat to assess the student’s grasp of the ideas involved in the exercises
it contains.

Copyright 2021 Matrix Technology Solutions Limited

Page 2

Notes

Introduction

The wind tunnel is designed to facilitate a wide range of experimentation around
aerodynamics and fluid flow. The following worksheets provide an introduction to
these studies and illustrate what is possible.
An overview of the structure and function of the wind tunnel and its components
is a necessary starting point. Students need a guided tour of the equipment, to
appreciate its capabilities. In particular, the configuration of the menus offered
by the control unit needs outlining.

Worksheet
1
Pitot-static
tube

Concepts involved:
incompressible fluid
Bernouilli’s theorem
static pressure

streamline flow
U-tube manometer
stagnation pressure

turbulent flow
pitot-static tube
dynamic pressure

Students need to appreciate the importance of correct alignment for the pitotstatic tube in the air stream.
The aim of the investigation is to relate the air speed in the wind tunnel with the
resulting air pressure. In later investigations, this allows us to use measured air
pressure to deduce the prevailing air speed.
It also compares the performance of the U-tube manometer with that of a digital
pressure sensor, validating the use of the latter in later worksheets.

Worksheet
2
Flow
patterns
around a
cylinder

Concepts involved:
Reynolds number

pressure coefficient

pressure distribution diagram

This investigation focuses on the pressure distribution around an object
immersed in a fluid, in this case a cylinder placed in a stream of air.
Students use their measurements to calculate the resulting pressure coefficient
and generate a pressure distribution diagram from their results.
Each stage in this investigation involves taking measurements at thirty seven
different angles of attack. This is then repeated for three more air speeds.
It may be desirable to spread these tasks around a number of student groups,
with a final plenary session to pool the results.
Please note and advise students using spreadsheets to obtain the graphs, thatthat many require angles measured in radians. This conversion could be part of
the spreadsheet.

Copyright 2021 Matrix Technology Solutions Limited

Page 3

Notes

Worksheet
3
Flow
patterns
around an
aerofoil

Worksheet
4
Lift and drag
on an
aerofoil

Worksheet
5
Drag
coefficient

Concepts involved:
aerofoil

angle of attack

The challenge in this investigation is manipulating the equipment - twenty-three
tappings, twenty-three readings at each air speed, four air speeds.
Once again, for efficient classroom management, it may be preferable to spread
thee tasks around the student groups, using a final plenary session to pool
results.

Concepts involved:
lift

drag

The instructor may wish to outline the controversy over the cause of lift in an
aerofoil.
The conventional explanation called on Bernouilli’s equation. The implication
was that the air speed over the upper surface of the aerofoil is greater than that
over the lower surface resulting in a pressure difference and lift.
The alternative explanation invokes Newton’s laws of motion to explain that this
pressure difference is due to the bending of the streamlines over the surfaces.
The instructor may wish to use the software controlled angle adjustment and automated data collection. This would speed up the investigation. It would also allow students to widen the investigation to other angles and wind speeds.

Concepts involved:
drag coefficient
The drag coefficient formula introduces a quantity known as the ‘characteristic
area’ of the body, important in vehicle design. This is not necessarily the full
cross-sectional area of the body, but depends on the area of the body facing the
air flow. This could lead to a discussion and research project on implications for
vehicle design.
The instructor could allocate two different shapes to three groups of students
and hold a class presentation to compare and combine results.

Copyright 2021 Matrix Technology Solutions Limited

Page 4

Notes
Worksheet
6
Streamlined?

This is an open-ended investigation where students observe air flow around
objects by viewing the smoke trails around them.
Ideally they use the slow-motion facility, now available on most mobile ‘phones.
It requires a little practice in positioning the smoke generator nozzle, but the
results are worth the effort!
Student groups can be given different shapes to investigate, looking at the effect
of changing the air speed or changing the angle of attack. The results could be
delivered in a class presentation.

Worksheet
7
Where next?

This is a very open-ended investigation! It encourages students to focus on their
particular field of interest.
Students can design their own shapes, following the size guidelines given in the
worksheet, and plan a range of investigations using them.
A variety of manufacturing methods can be used but it is important to recognise
that considerable forces are exerted on the object by the air stream and so the
materials used must be strong enough to withstand them.

Copyright 2021 Matrix Technology Solutions Limited

Page 5

